chore: add guide on delaying serving specific requests (#3837)
fastify/fastify: docs/Guides/Delay-Accepting-Requests.md

<h1 align="center">Fastify</h1>

> # Delay Accepting Requests

Reviewer: Could you rename this to "A guide on how to use decorators and hooks"?

Reviewer 2: @mcollina this is meant to solve #2500 by detailing what to consider in such a specific scenario. This is a much more advanced case than simply "how do I use decorators and hooks?". We should definitely have such a guide, but this one isn't it.

Author: I agree with @jsumners. I believe this is too specific to be considered a general-purpose guide on those topics. Specially because it lacks many of the features available by hooks and plugins.

order to start serving requests. To do that it'd need to engage in the
[OAuth Authorization Code Flow](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow),
which would require it to listen to two requests from the authentication
provider:

1. the Authorization Code webhook
2. the tokens webhook

Until the authorization flow is done you wouldn't be able to serve customer
requests. What to do then?

There are several solutions for achieving that kind of behavior. Here we'll
introduce one of such techniques and, hopefully, you'll be able to get things
rolling asap!

## Solution

### Overview

The proposed solution is one of many possible ways for dealing with the
proposed scenario and many similar to it. It relies solely on Fastify, so no
fancy infrastructure tricks or third-party libraries will be necessary.

In order to simplify things we won't be dealing with a precise OAuth flow but,
instead, simulate a scenario in which some key is needed in order to serve
a request and that key can only be retrieved in runtime by authenticating with
an external provider.

The main goal here is to deny requests that would otherwise fail **as early as

> possible** and with some **meaningful context**. That's both useful for the

Author: `context` here is meant as an overview of the situation so the client making the request would be able to understand what was going on. We could replace `context` with `information` here and the sentence would have the same meaning (or at least that's what I aimed for).

> possible** and with some **meaningful context**. That's both useful for the

Reviewer 2: "context" is the correct word here.

server (less resources allocated into a bound-to-fail task) and for the client
(they get some meaningful information and don't need to wait long for it).

That will be achieved by wrapping into a custom plugin two main features:

1. the mechanism for authenticating with the provider
[decorating](../Referece/Decorators.md) the `fastify` object with the
authentication key (`magicKey` from here onwards)
1. the mechanism for denying requests that would, otherwise, fail

### Hands-on

For this sample solution we'll be using the following tools on a Linux

> environment running the `5.17.1-arch1-1` Kernel version:

Reviewer 3: I'd remove the specific environment, it must run in all the operational systems.

Author: Yeah, that was meant to maybe justify very slight differences that might exist from running the same scripts on different environments. But it might not make sense in this context. I'll remove it.

- `node.js v16.14.2`
- `npm 8.5.0`

> - `fastify 3.28.0`

Reviewer: Could you update this to fastify v4.0.0-rc.1

- `fastify-plugin 3.0.1`
- `undici 5.0.0`

Say we have the following base server set up at first:

```js

> const fastify = require('fastify')
> 
> const provider = require('./provider')
> 
> const server = new fastify({ logger: true })

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const Fastify = require('fastify')

const provider = require('./provider')

const server = Fastify({ logger: true })
```

const USUAL_WAIT_TIME_MS = 5000

> server.get('/ping', (request, reply) => {

Reviewer 2: Please do not use arrow functions for handlers throughout this guide. Supply full `function (request, reply) {}` functions.

  reply.send({ error: false, ready: request.server.magicKey !== null })
})

server.post('/webhook', (request, reply) => {
  // It's good practice to validate webhook requests really come from
  // whoever you expect. This is skipped in this sample for the sake
  // of simplicity

>   const { magicKey } = JSON.parse(request.body)

Reviewer: This should be parsed by Fastify if you set the appropriate headers

  request.server.magicKey = magicKey
  request.log.info('Ready for customer requests!')

  reply.send({ error: false })
})

server.get('/v1*', async (request, reply) => {
  try {
    const data = await provider.fetchSensitiveData(request.server.magicKey)

>     reply.send({ customer: true, error: false })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   return { customer: true, error: false }
```

  } catch (error) {
    request.log.error({
      error,
      message: 'Failed at fetching sensitive data from provider',
    })
    
    reply.statusCode = 500

>     reply.send({ customer: null, error: true })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   return { customer: null, error: true }
```

  }
})

server.decorate('magicKey', null)

server.listen('1234', () => {
  provider.thirdPartyMagicKeyGenerator(USUAL_WAIT_TIME_MS)
    .catch((error) => {
      server.log.error({
        error,
        message: 'Got an error while trying to get the magic key!'
      })

      // Since we won't be able to serve requests, might as well wrap
      // things up
      server.close(() => process.exit(1))
    })
})
```

Our code is simply setting up a Fastify server with a few routes:

- we're setting a `/ping` route that specifies whether the service is ready or
not to serve requests by checking if the `magicKey` has been set up

> - we're setting a `/webook` endpoint for our provider to reach back to us when

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- we're setting a `/webhook endpoint for our provider to reach back to us when
```

> - we're setting a `/webhook endpoint for our provider to reach back to us when
> they're ready to share the `magicKey`. The `magicKey` is, then, saved into the
> previously set decorator on the `fastify` object
> - we're, finally, a catchall `/v1*` route to simulate what would have been
> customer-initiated requests. These requests rely on us having a valid `magicKey`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- we're setting a `/webhook` endpoint for our provider to reach back to us when
they're ready to share the `magicKey`. The `magicKey` is, then, saved into the
previously set decorator on the `fastify` object
- a catchall `/v1*` route to simulate what would have been
customer-initiated requests. These requests rely on us having a valid `magicKey`
```

The `provider.js` file, simulating actions of an external provider, is as
follows:

```js
const { fetch } = require('undici')

const MAGIC_KEY = '12345'

const delay = (ms) =>

>   new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, ms))

Reviewer: use promisified setTimeout from core

exports.thirdPartyMagicKeyGenerator = async (ms) => {
  // Simulate processing delay
  await delay(ms)

  // Simulate webhook request to our server
  const { status } = await fetch(
    'http://localhost:1234/webhook',
    {
      body: JSON.stringify({ magicKey: MAGIC_KEY }),
      method: 'POST',
    },
  )

  if (status !== 200) {
    throw new Error('Failed to fetch magic key')
  }
}

exports.fetchSensitiveData = async (key) => {
  // Simulate processing delay
  await delay(700)
  const data = { sensitive: true }
  
  if (key === MAGIC_KEY) {
    return data
  }
  
  throw new Error('Invalid key')
}
```

> The most important snipped here is the `thirdPartyMagicKeyGenerator` function,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most important snippet here is the `thirdPartyMagicKeyGenerator` function,
```

which will wait for 5 seconds and, then, make the POST request to our `/webhook`
endpoint.

When our server spins up we start listening to new connections without having
our `magicKey` set up. Until we receive the webhook request from our external
provider (in this example we're simulating a 5 second delay) all our requests
under the `/v1*` path (customer requests) will fail. Worse than that: they'll
fail after we've reached out to our provider with an invalid key and got an
error from them. That wasted time and resources, both from us and from our
customers. Depending on the kind of application we're running and on the request
rate we're expecting this delay is not acceptable or, at least, very annoying.

Of course, that could be simply mitigated by checking whether or not the
`magicKey` has been set up before hitting the provider in the `/v1*` handler.
Sure, but that would lead to bloat on the code. And imagine we have dozens of
different routes, with different controllers, that require that key. Should
we repeatedly add that check in all of them? That's error-prone and there are
more elegant solutions.

What we'll do to improve this setup overall is create a

> [`Plugin`](../Reference/Plugins.md) that'll be the sole responsible for making

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`Plugin`](../Reference/Plugins.md) that'll be solely responsible for making
```

sure we both:

- do not accept requests that would otherwise fail until we're ready for them
- make sure we reach out to our provider as soon as possible

This way we'll make sure all our setup regarding this specific _business rule_
is placed on a single entity, instead of scattered all across our code base.

With the changes to improve this behavior, the code will look like this:

##### index.js

```js
const fastify = require('fastify')

const provider = require('./provider')
const delayIncomingRequests = require('./delay-incoming-requests')

const server = new fastify({ logger: true })

server.register(delayIncomingRequests)

// Non-blocked URL
server.get('/ping', (request, reply) => {
  reply.send({ error: false, ready: request.server.magicKey !== null })
})

// Webhook to handle the provider's response - also non-blocked
server.post('/webhook', (request, reply) => {
  // It's good practice to validate webhook requests really come from
  // whoever you expect. This is skipped in this sample for the sake
  // of simplicity

>   const { magicKey } = JSON.parse(request.body)

Author: Because I had missed setting the `Content-Type` header as you flagged below. Thanks

Content-Length: 29
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
Date: Fri, 15 Apr 2022 23:03:16 GMT
Keep-Alive: timeout=5

{
    "error": false,
    "ready": false
}
```

After that there were more interesting log messages:

```
{"time":1650063798377,"reqId":"req-3","req":{"method":"POST","url":"/webhook","hostname":"localhost:1234","remoteAddress":"127.0.0.1","remotePort":51932},"msg":"incoming request"}
{"time":1650063798379,"reqId":"req-3","msg":"Ready for customer requests!"}
{"time":1650063798379,"reqId":"req-3","res":{"statusCode":200},"responseTime":1.3567829988896847,"msg":"request completed"}
```

This time it was our simulated external provider hitting us to let us know
authentication had gone well and telling us what our `magicKey` was. We saved
that into our `magicKey` decorator and celebrated with a log message saying we
were now ready for customers to hit us!

```
{"time":1650063799858,"reqId":"req-4","req":{"method":"GET","url":"/v1","hostname":"localhost:1234","remoteAddress":"127.0.0.1","remotePort":51934},"msg":"incoming request"}
{"time":1650063800561,"reqId":"req-4","res":{"statusCode":200},"responseTime":702.4662979990244,"msg":"request completed"}
```

> Finally, a final `GET /v1` request was made and, this time, it succeeded. Its

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Finally, a final `GET /v1` request was made and, this time, it succeeded. It's
```

Author: `Its` is used here as the possessive determiner for the request mentioned in the previous sentence. It fits the same purpose as `my` or `his` would on different situations.

response was the following:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Connection: keep-alive
Content-Length: 31
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
Date: Fri, 15 Apr 2022 23:03:20 GMT
Keep-Alive: timeout=5

{
    "customer": true,
    "error": false
}
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: This guide should state this is a tutorial to demonstrate the use of plugins, decorators and hooks. Specifically, it's not production ready as it's not stateless or horizontally scalable. In order to make it scalable, the secret should be stored somewhere in a database or similar.

## Introduction

Fastify provides several [hooks](../Reference/Hooks.md) useful for a variety of
situations. One of them is the [`onReady`](../Reference/Hooks.md#onready) hook, which is
useful for executing tasks *right before* the server starts accepting new
requests. There isn't, though, a direct mechanism to handle scenarios in which
you'd like the server to start accepting **specific** requests and denying all
others, at least up to some point.

Say, for instance, your server needs to authenticate with an OAuth provider in
order to start serving requests. To do that it'd need to engage in the
[OAuth Authorization Code Flow](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow),
which would require it to listen to two requests from the authentication
provider:

1. the Authorization Code webhook
2. the tokens webhook

Until the authorization flow is done you wouldn't be able to serve customer
requests. What to do then?

There are several solutions for achieving that kind of behavior. Here we'll
introduce one of such techniques and, hopefully, you'll be able to get things
rolling asap!

## Solution

### Overview

> The proposed solution is one of many possible ways for dealing with the
> proposed scenario and many similar to it. It relies solely on Fastify, so no

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The proposed solution is one of many possible ways of dealing with this
scenario and many similar to it. It relies solely on Fastify, so no
```

fancy infrastructure tricks or third-party libraries will be necessary.

> In order to simplify things we won't be dealing with a precise OAuth flow but,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To simplify things we won't be dealing with a precise OAuth flow but,
```

> instead, simulate a scenario in which some key is needed in order to serve

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
instead, simulate a scenario in which some key is needed to serve
```

a request and that key can only be retrieved in runtime by authenticating with
an external provider.

The main goal here is to deny requests that would otherwise fail **as early as
possible** and with some **meaningful context**. That's both useful for the

> server (less resources allocated into a bound-to-fail task) and for the client

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
server (fewer resources allocated to a bound-to-fail task) and for the client
```

  // Simulate processing delay
  await delay(ms)

  // Simulate webhook request to our server
  const { status } = await fetch(
    'http://localhost:1234/webhook',
    {
      body: JSON.stringify({ magicKey: MAGIC_KEY }),
      method: 'POST',
      headers: {
        'content-type': 'application/json',
      },
    },
  )

  if (status !== 200) {
    throw new Error('Failed to fetch magic key')
  }
}

exports.fetchSensitiveData = async (key) => {
  // Simulate processing delay
  await delay(700)
  const data = { sensitive: true }
  
  if (key === MAGIC_KEY) {
    return data
  }
  
  throw new Error('Invalid key')
}
```

The most important snippet here is the `thirdPartyMagicKeyGenerator` function,
which will wait for 5 seconds and, then, make the POST request to our `/webhook`
endpoint.

When our server spins up we start listening to new connections without having
our `magicKey` set up. Until we receive the webhook request from our external
provider (in this example we're simulating a 5 second delay) all our requests
under the `/v1*` path (customer requests) will fail. Worse than that: they'll
fail after we've reached out to our provider with an invalid key and got an

> error from them. That wasted time and resources, both from us and from our

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
error from them. That wasted time and resources for us and our
```

customers. Depending on the kind of application we're running and on the request
rate we're expecting this delay is not acceptable or, at least, very annoying.

Of course, that could be simply mitigated by checking whether or not the
`magicKey` has been set up before hitting the provider in the `/v1*` handler.

> Sure, but that would lead to bloat on the code. And imagine we have dozens of

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Sure, but that would lead to bloat in the code. And imagine we have dozens of
```

different routes, with different controllers, that require that key. Should

> we repeatedly add that check in all of them? That's error-prone and there are

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
we repeatedly add that check to all of them? That's error-prone and there are
```

        reply.header('Retry-After', USUAL_WAIT_TIME_MS)
        reply.send({ error: true, retryInMs: USUAL_WAIT_TIME_MS })
      }

      next()
    })

    // Register to-be-delayed routes
    fastify.register(routes, opts)

    done()
  }

module.exports = {
  setup: fp(setup),
  delay,
}
```

##### customer-routes.js

```js
const fp = require('fastify-plugin')

const provider = require('./provider')

module.exports = fp(async function (fastify) {
  fastify.get('*', async function (request ,reply) {
    try {
      const data = await provider.fetchSensitiveData(request.server.magicKey)
      return { customer: true, error: false }
    } catch (error) {
      request.log.error({
        error,
        message: 'Failed at fetching sensitive data from provider',
      })

      reply.statusCode = 500
      return { customer: null, error: true }
    }
  })
})
```

There is a very specific change on the previously existing files that is worth
mentioning: Beforehand we were using the `server.listen` callback to start the
authentication process with the external provider and we were decorating the
`server` object right before initializing the server. That was bloating our

> server initialization setup with unnecessary code and didn't really have much to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
server initialization setup with unnecessary code and didn't have much to
```

do with starting the Fastify server. It was a business logic that didn't have
its specific place in the code base.

Now we've implemented the `delayIncomingRequests` plugin in the
`delay-incoming-requests.js` file. That's, in truth, a module split into two
different plugins that will build up to a single use-case. That's the brains of
our operation. Let's walk through what the plugins do:

##### setup

The `setup` plugin is responsible for making sure we reach out to our provider
asap and store the `magicKey` somewhere available to all our handlers.

```js
  fastify.server.on('listening', doMagic)
```

> As soon as the server starts listening (very similar behavior as to adding a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As soon as the server starts listening (very similar behavior to adding a
```

piece of code to the `server.listen`'s callback function) a `listening` event

> is emitted (fore more info refer to https://nodejs.org/api/net.html#event-listening).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
is emitted (for more info refer to https://nodejs.org/api/net.html#event-listening).
```

We use that to reach out to our provider as soon as possible, with the `doMagic`
function.

```js
  fastify.decorate('magicKey', null)
```

The `magicKey` decoration is also part of the plugin now. We initialize it with
a placeholder, waiting for the valid value to be retrieved.

##### delay

`delay` is not a plugin itself. It's actually a plugin *factory*. It expects
a Fastify plugin with `routes` and exports the actual plugin that'll handle
enveloping those routes with an `onRequest` hook that will make sure no
requests are handled until we're ready for them.

```js
const delay = (routes) =>
  function (fastify, opts, done) {
    // Make sure customer requests won't be accepted if the magicKey is not
    // available
    fastify.addHook('onRequest', function (request, reply, next) {
      if (!request.server.magicKey) {
        reply.statusCode = 503
        reply.header('Retry-After', USUAL_WAIT_TIME_MS)
        reply.send({ error: true, retryInMs: USUAL_WAIT_TIME_MS })
      }

      next()
    })

    // Register to-be-delayed routes
    fastify.register(routes, opts)

    done()
  }
```

> Instead of updating each and every single controller that might use the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Instead of updating every single controller that might use the
```

{"time":1650063798379,"reqId":"req-3","msg":"Ready for customer requests!"}
{"time":1650063798379,"reqId":"req-3","res":{"statusCode":200},"responseTime":1.3567829988896847,"msg":"request completed"}
```

This time it was our simulated external provider hitting us to let us know
authentication had gone well and telling us what our `magicKey` was. We saved
that into our `magicKey` decorator and celebrated with a log message saying we
were now ready for customers to hit us!

```
{"time":1650063799858,"reqId":"req-4","req":{"method":"GET","url":"/v1","hostname":"localhost:1234","remoteAddress":"127.0.0.1","remotePort":51934},"msg":"incoming request"}
{"time":1650063800561,"reqId":"req-4","res":{"statusCode":200},"responseTime":702.4662979990244,"msg":"request completed"}
```

Finally, a final `GET /v1` request was made and, this time, it succeeded. Its
response was the following:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Connection: keep-alive
Content-Length: 31
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
Date: Fri, 15 Apr 2022 23:03:20 GMT
Keep-Alive: timeout=5

{
    "customer": true,
    "error": false
}
```

## Conclusion

> This is the gist of it. Of course the specifics of the implementation will vary
> from a problem to another, but the main goal of this guide was to show a very

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Specifics of the implementation will vary
from one problem to another, but the main goal of this guide was to show a very
```

specific use case of an issue that could be solved within Fastify's ecosystem.

> This guide is a tutorial ont he use of plugins, decorators and hooks to solve

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This guide is a tutorial on the use of plugins, decorators, and hooks to solve
```

the problem of delaying serving specific requests on our application. It's not
production-ready, as it keeps local state (the `magicKey`) and it's not
horizontally scalable (we don't want to flood our provider, right?). One way
of improving it would be storing the `magicKey` somewhere else (perhaps a
cache database?).

The keywords here were [Decorators](../Reference/Decorators.md),

> [Hooks](../Reference/Hooks.md) and [Plugins](../Reference/Plugins.md). Combining

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[Hooks](../Reference/Hooks.md), and [Plugins](../Reference/Plugins.md). Combining
```

> what Fastify has to offer can lead to very ingenuous and creative solution to a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
what Fastify has to offer can lead to very ingenious and creative solutions to a
```
